Thank you. Thank you, everybody. Good evening. You know, I had an entire speech prepared for this wonderful occasion, but now that I'm here I think I'm going to try something a little different. Tonight I want to speak from the heart. I'm going to speak off the cuff.

[Teleprompters rise.]

Good evening. Pause for laughter. Wait a minute, this may not be working as well as I -- Let me try that again. 

Good evening, everybody. I would like to welcome you all to the 10-day anniversary of my first 100 days. I am Barack Obama. Most of you covered me. All of you voted for me. Apologies to the Fox table. They're -- Where are they? I have to confess I really did not want to be here tonight, but I knew I had to come -- just one more problem that I've inherited from George W. Bush.

But now that I'm here, it's great to be here. It's great to see all of you. Michelle Obama is here, the First Lady of the United States. Hasn't she been an outstanding First Lady? She's even begun to bridge the differences that have divided us for so long, because no matter which party you belong to we can all agree that Michelle has the right to bare arms.

Now Sasha and Malia aren't here tonight because they're grounded. You can't just take Air Force One on a joy ride to Manhattan. I don't care whose kids you are. We've been setting some ground rules here. They're starting to get a little carried away. 

Now, speaking -- when I think about children obviously I think about Michelle and it reminds me that tomorrow is Mother's Day. Happy Mother's Day to all the mothers in the audience. I do have to say, though, that this is a tough holiday for Rahm Emanuel because he's not used to saying the word "day" after "mother." That's true.

David Axelrod is here. You know, David and I have been together for a long time. I can still remember -- I got to sort of -- I tear up a little bit when I think back to that day that I called Ax so many years ago and said, you and I can do wonderful things together. And he said to me the same thing that partners all across America are saying to one another right now: Let's go to Iowa and make it official.

Michael Steele is in the house tonight. Or as he would say, "in the heezy." What's up? Where is Michael? Michael, for the last time, the Republican Party does not qualify for a bailout. Rush Limbaugh does not count as a troubled asset, I'm sorry.

Dick Cheney was supposed to be here but he is very busy working on his memoirs, tentatively titled, "How to Shoot Friends and Interrogate People."

You know, it's been a whirlwind of activity these first hundred days. We've enacted a major economic recovery package, we passed a budget, we forged a new path in Iraq, and no President in history has ever named three Commerce Secretaries this quickly. Which reminds me, if Judd Gregg is here, your business cards are ready now.

On top of that, I've also reversed the ban on stem cell research, signed an expansion -- signed an expansion of the children's health insurance. Just last week, Car and Driver named me auto executive of the year. Something I'm very proud of.

We've also begun to change the culture in Washington. We've even made the White House a place where people can learn and can grow. Just recently, Larry Summers asked if he could chair the White House Council on Women and Girls. And I do appreciate that Larry is here tonight because it is seven hours past his bedtime. Gibbs liked that one. 

In the last hundred days, we've also grown the Democratic Party by infusing it with new energy and bringing in fresh, young faces like Arlen Specter. Now, Joe Biden rightly deserves a lot of credit for convincing Arlen to make the switch, but Secretary Clinton actually had a lot to do with it too. One day she just pulled him aside and she said, Arlen, you know what I always say -- "if you can't beat them, join them." 

Which brings me to another thing that's changed in this new, warmer, fuzzier White House, and that's my relationship with Hillary. You know, we had been rivals during the campaign, but these days we could not be closer. In fact, the second she got back from Mexico she pulled into a hug and gave me a big kiss. Told me I'd better get down there myself. Which I really appreciated. I mean, it was -- it was nice.

And of course we've also begun to change America's image in the world. We talked about this during this campaign and we're starting to execute. We've renewed alliances with important partners and friends. If you look on the screen there, there I am with Japanese Prime Minister Taro Aso. There I am with Gordon Brown. 

But as I said during the campaign, we can't just talk to our friends. As hard as it is, we also have to talk to our enemies, and I've begun to do exactly that. Take a look at the monitor there. Now, let me be clear, just because he handed me a copy of Peter Pan does not mean that I'm going to read it -- but it's good diplomatic practice to just accept these gifts.

All this change hasn't been easy. Change never is. So I've cut the tension by bringing a new friend to the White House. He's warm, he's cuddly, loyal, enthusiastic. You just have to keep him on a tight leash. Every once in a while he goes charging off in the wrong direction and gets himself into trouble. But enough about Joe Biden.

All in all, we're proud of the change we've brought to Washington in these first hundred days but we've got a lot of work left to do, as all of you know. So I'd like to talk a little bit about what my administration plans to achieve in the next hundred days.

During the second hundred days, we will design, build and open a library dedicated to my first hundred days. It's going to be big, folks. In the next hundred days, I will learn to go off the prompter and Joe Biden will learn to stay on the prompter.

In the next hundred days, our bipartisan outreach will be so successful that even John Boehner will consider becoming a Democrat. After all, we have a lot in common. He is a person of color. Although not a color that appears in the natural world. What's up, John?

In the next hundred days, I will meet with a leader who rules over millions with an iron fist, who owns the airwaves and uses his power to crush all who would challenge his authority at the ballot box. It's good to see you, Mayor Bloomberg.

In the next hundred days, we will housetrain our dog, Bo, because the last thing Tim Geithner needs is someone else treating him like a fire hydrant. In the next hundred days, I will strongly consider losing my cool.

Finally, I believe that my next hundred days will be so successful I will be able to complete them in 72 days. And on the 73rd day, I will rest. 

I just -- I want to end by saying a few words about the men and women in this room whose job it is to inform the public and pursue the truth. You know, we meet tonight at a moment of extraordinary challenge for this nation and for the world, but it's also a time of real hardship for the field of journalism. And like so many other businesses in this global age, you've seen sweeping changes and technology and communications that lead to a sense of uncertainty and anxiety about what the future will hold.

Across the country, there are extraordinary, hardworking journalists who have lost their jobs in recent days, recent weeks, recent months. And I know that each newspaper and media outlet is wrestling with how to respond to these changes, and some are struggling simply to stay open. And it won't be easy. Not every ending will be a happy one. 

But it's also true that your ultimate success as an industry is essential to the success of our democracy. It's what makes this thing work. You know, Thomas Jefferson once said that if he had the choice between a government without newspapers, or newspapers without a government, he would not hesitate to choose the latter. 

Clearly, Thomas Jefferson never had cable news to contend with -- but his central point remains: A government without newspapers, a government without a tough and vibrant media of all sorts, is not an option for the United States of America.

So I may not -- I may not agree with everything you write or report. I may even complain, or more likely Gibbs will complain, from time to time about how you do your jobs, but I do so with the knowledge that when you are at your best, then you help me be at my best. You help all of us who serve at the pleasure of the American people do our jobs better by holding us accountable, by demanding honesty, by preventing us from taking shortcuts and falling into easy political games that people are so desperately weary of. 

And that kind of reporting is worth preserving -- not just for your sake, but for the public's. We count on you to help us make sense of a complex world and tell the stories of our lives the way they happen, and we look for you for truth, even if it's always an approximation, even if -- 

This is a season of renewal and reinvention. That is what government must learn to do, that's what businesses must learn to do, and that's what journalism is in the process of doing. And when I look out at this room and think about the dedicated men and women whose questions I've answered over the last few years, I know that for all the challenges this industry faces, it's not short on talent or creativity or passion or commitment. It's not short of young people who are eager to break news or the not-so-young who still manage to ask the tough ones time and time again. These qualities alone will not solve all your problems, but they certainly prove that the problems are worth solving. And that is a good place as any to begin.

So I offer you my thanks, I offer you my support, and I look forward to working with you and answering to you and the American people as we seek a more perfect union in the months and years ahead.

Thank you very much, everybody.

Thank you.

Thank you.  Good evening, everybody.  Good evening.  I could not be more thrilled to be here tonight -- at the White House Correspondents’ Dinner.  This is great crowd.  They’re already laughing.  It’s terrific.

Chuck Todd -- love you, brother.  I’m delighted to see some of the cast members of Glee are here.  And Jimmy Kimmel, it’s an honor, man.  What’s so funny?

My fellow Americans, we gather during a historic anniversary.  Last year at this time -- in fact, on this very weekend -- we finally delivered justice to one of the world’s most notorious individuals. [photo of Donald Trump appears onscreen] Now, this year, we gather in the midst of a heated election season.  And Axelrod tells me I should never miss a chance to reintroduce myself to the American people.  So tonight, this is how I’d like to begin:  My name is Barack Obama.  My mother was born in Kansas.  My father was born in Kenya.  And I was born, of course, in Hawaii.

In 2009, I took office in the face of some enormous challenges.  Now, some have said I blame too many problems on my predecessor, but let’s not forget that’s a practice that was initiated by George W. Bush.  Since then, Congress and I have certainly had our differences; yet, I’ve tried to be civil, to not take any cheap shots.  And that’s why I want to especially thank all the members who took a break from their exhausting schedule of not passing any laws to be here tonight.  Let’s give them a big round of applause.

Despite many obstacles, much has changed during my time in office.  Four years ago, I was locked in a brutal primary battle with Hillary Clinton.  Four years later, she won’t stop drunk-texting me from Cartagena.

Four years ago, I was a Washington outsider.  Four years later, I’m at this dinner.  Four years ago, I looked like this.  Today, I look like this.  And four years from now, I will look like this.  That’s not even funny.

Anyway, it’s great to be here this evening in the vast, magnificent Hilton ballroom -- or what Mitt Romney would call a little fixer-upper.  I mean, look at this party.  We’ve got men in tuxes, women in gowns, fine wine, first-class entertainment.  I was just relieved to learn this was not a GSA conference.  Unbelievable.  Not even the mind reader knew what they were thinking.

Of course, the White House Correspondents’ Dinner is known as the prom of Washington D.C. -- a term coined by political reporters who clearly never had the chance to go to an actual prom.

Our chaperone for the evening is Jimmy Kimmel -- who is perfect for the job since most of tonight’s audience is in his key demographic -- people who fall asleep during Nightline.  Jimmy got his start years ago on The Man Show.  In Washington, that’s what we call a congressional hearing on contraception.

And plenty of journalists are here tonight.  I'd be remiss if I didn’t congratulate the Huffington Post on their Pulitzer Prize.  You deserve it, Arianna.  There's no one else out there linking to the kinds of hard-hitting journalism that HuffPo is linking to every single day.  Give them a round of applause.  And you don’t pay them -- it's a great business model.

Even Sarah Palin is getting back into the game, guest hosting on The Today Show -- which reminds me of an old saying:  What's the difference between a hockey mom and a pit bull?  A pit bull is delicious.  A little soy sauce.

Now, I know at this point many of you are expecting me to go after my likely opponent, Newt Gingrich.  Newt, there's still time, man.  But I'm not going to do that -- I'm not going to attack any of the Republican candidates.  Take Mitt Romney -- he and I actually have a lot in common.  We both think of our wives as our better halves, and polls show, to a alarmingly insulting extent, the American people agree.  We also both have degrees from Harvard; I have one, he has two.  What a snob.

Of course, we've also had our differences.  Recently, his campaign criticized me for slow jamming the news with Jimmy Fallon.  In fact, I understand Governor Romney was so incensed he asked his staff if he could get some equal time on The Merv Griffin Show.  Still, I guess Governor Romney is feeling pretty good about things because he took a few hours off the other day to see The Hunger Games -- some of you have seen it.  It's a movie about people who court wealthy sponsors and then brutally savage each other until only one contestant is left standing.  I'm sure this was a really good change of pace for him.  I have not seen The Hunger Games; not enough class warfare for me.

Of course, I know everybody is predicting a nasty election, and thankfully, we've all agreed that families are off limits.  Dogs, however, are apparently fair game.  And while both campaigns have had some fun with this, the other day I saw a new ad from one of these outside groups that, frankly, I think crossed the line.  I know Governor Romney says he has no control over what his super PACs do, but can we show the ad real quick?

That’s pretty rough -- but I can take it, because my stepfather always told me, it's a boy-eat-dog world out there.

Now, if I do win a second term as President, let me just say something to all the -- let me just say something to all my conspiracy-oriented friends on the right who think I'm planning to unleash some secret agenda:  You're absolutely right.  So allow me to close with a quick preview of the secret agenda you can expect in a second Obama administration. 

In my first term, I sang Al Green; in my second term, I'm going with Young Jeezy.

MRS. OBAMA:  Yeah.

THE PRESIDENT:  Michelle said, yeah.  I sing that to her sometimes.

In my first term, we ended the war in Iraq; in my second term, I will win the war on Christmas.   In my first term, we repealed the policy known as "don't ask, don't tell" -- wait, though; in my second term, we will replace it with a policy known as, it's raining men.  In my first term, we passed health care reform; in my second term, I guess I'll pass it again.

I do want to end tonight on a slightly more serious note -- whoever takes the oath of office next January will face some great challenges, but he will also inherit traditions that make us greater than the challenges we face.  And one of those traditions is represented here tonight: a free press that isn't afraid to ask questions, to examine and to criticize.  And in service of that mission, all of you make sacrifices. 

Tonight, we remember journalists such as Anthony Shadid and Marie Colvin -- who made the ultimate sacrifice as they sought to shine a light on some of the most important stories of our time.  So whether you are a blogger or a broadcaster, whether you take on powerful interests here at home or put yourself in harm's way overseas, I have the greatest respect and admiration for what you do.  I know sometimes you like to give me a hard time -- and I certainly like to return the favor -- but I never forget that our country depends on you.  You help protect our freedom, our democracy, and our way of life. 

And just to set the record straight, I really do enjoy attending these dinners.  In fact, I had a lot more material prepared, but I have to get the Secret Service home in time for their new curfew.

Thank you very much, everybody.  Thank you.

Thank you so much, Ed.  And to all the other board members; to honored guests; and to the lovely First Lady. Good evening. 

Ed is right, I work a lot.  And so I wasn’t sure that I should actually come tonight.  Biden talked me into it.  He leaned over and he said, "Mr. President -- this is no ordinary dinner. This is a big [beep] meal."

It's been quite a year since I've spoken here last -- lots of ups, lots of downs -- except for my approval ratings, which have just gone down. But that's politics.  It doesn’t bother me.  Beside I happen to know that my approval ratings are still very high in the country of my birth.

And then just the other day, my dear friend, Hillary Clinton, pulled me aside and she gave me a pep talk.  She said, despite the numbers, she said, "Don't worry, Barack, you're likeable enough."  Which made me feel better.

Of course I may not have had the star power that I once had -- but in my defense, neither do all of you.

People say to me, "Mr. President, you helped revive the banking industry, you saved GM and Chrysler.  What about the news business?"  I have to explain, hey, I'm just the President.  I'm not a miracle worker, here.

Though I am glad that the only person whose ratings fell more than mine last year is here tonight -- great to see you, Jay. I'm also glad that I'm speaking first, because we've all seen what happens when somebody takes the time slot after Leno's.

JAY LENO:  Goodnight, everybody.

THE PRESIDENT:  By the way, all of the jokes here tonight are brought to you by our friends at Goldman Sachs.  So you don't have to worry -- they make money whether you laugh or not.

We do have a number of notable guests in attendance here tonight.  Obviously I'm most pleased that Michelle accompanied me.  She doesn’t always go to these things.  And there are few things in life that are harder to find and more important to keep than love -- well, love and a birth certificate.

The Jonas Brothers are here. They're out there somewhere.  Sasha and Malia are huge fans.  But, boys, don't get any ideas. I have two words for you -- predator drones. You will never see it coming.  You think I'm joking.

Speaking of 'tween heartthrobs, Scott Brown is here.  I admire Scott -- a rare politician in Washington with nothing to hide. Now, you should be aware that Scott Brown is not the only one with a salacious photo spread floating around.  Recently David Axelrod was offered a centerfold opportunity of his own -- now, I did not know that Krispy-Kreme had a catalog. But it's true. 

I saw Michael Steele backstage when we were taking pictures -- aka Notorious GOP.  Michael, who knows what truly plagues America today -- taxation without representin' -- my brother.  I did a similar routine last year, but it always works.

Odds are that the Salahis are here.  There haven't been people that were more unwelcome at a party since Charlie Crist.

Unfortunately, John McCain couldn't make it.  Recently he claimed that he had never identified himself as a maverick.  And we all know what happens in Arizona when you don't have ID.  Adios, amigos.

Look, I feel for John.  You know, we were on the road together and obviously had a hard-fought battle, and you learn, certainly at the national level, politics isn’t easy.  This year I've experienced my share of disappointments.  For example, I had my heart set on the Nobel Prize -- for Physics.  But, hey, you can't win 'em all.

Speaking of undeserved honors, a few weeks ago I was able to throw out the first pitch at the Nationals game.  And I don't know if you saw it, but I threw it a little high and a little outside.  This is how FOX News covered it:  "President panders to extreme left-wing of batter box."  On the other hand, MSNBC had a different take: "President pitches no-hitter." And then CNN went a different way altogether. [Video shown about volcano eruption in Iceland.] I guess that's why they're the most trusted name in news.

Now, look, I have a reputation for giving cable a hard time, so let's pick on Politico for a while.  You know, people attack Politico for putting a new focus on trivial issues, political fodder, gossip sheet.  That's not fair.  Politico has been doing this for centuries now.  Just check out these headlines -- our researchers found these:  "Japan surrenders -- where's the bounce?"  Then there's this one:  "Lincoln saves Union, but can he save House majority?"  I don't know if you can see, there's a little portion there -- "He's lost the Southern white vote."  It's an astute analysis there.

And my favorite, July 3, 1776 -- "Senior Whig official: Talks break down, independence dead."

So this is nothing new.  But even though the mainstream press gives me a hard time, I hear that I'm still pretty big on Twitter, Facebook -- or as Sarah Palin calls it, "the socialized media."

Of course, that's not the only thing that we've been accused of socializing this year.  You might have heard we passed a health care bill and -- Is that Roger Ailes applauding out there?  Some Republicans have suggested that the bill contains a few secret provisions.  That's ridiculous.  There aren’t a few secret provisions in the health care plan -- there are, like, hundreds.

Tonight, in the interest of transparency, I'd like to share a couple.  Let's see -- this provision is called the Bay State of Denial.  It reads:  "This bill shall cover short-term memory loss related to the passage of Massachusetts health care reform."  So, good news, Mitt, your condition is covered.

This next provision is called the Jersey Shore-Up.  It reads:  "The following individuals shall be excluded from the indoor tanning tax within this bill."  Snooki, J-WOWW, the Situation, and House Minority Leader John Boehner.

This provision ought to put a common misperception to rest. It says right here:  "If you do not like the ruling of your death panel you can appeal."

Now, look, obviously I've learned this year politics can be a tough business, but there are times where you just can't help but laugh.  You know what really tickles me?  Eric Massa.  Apparently Massa claimed that Rahm came up to him one day in the House locker room, stark naked, started screaming obscenities at him -- to which I say, welcome to my world.  I feel you.  It's a tense moment.

You know, even as we enjoy each other's company tonight, we're also mindful of the incredible struggles of our fellow Americans in the Gulf Coast, both those leading the efforts to stem this crisis and those along the coast whose livelihoods are in jeopardy as a result of the spill. 

Also in our thoughts and prayers tonight are the men and women in uniform who put their lives at risk each and every day for our safety and freedom.  So in that spirit, I'd also like to pay a tribute to the journalists who play an extraordinary role in telling their stories. 

Earlier today I gave the commencement address at Michigan, where I spoke to the graduates about what is required to keep out democracy thriving in the 21st century.  And one of the points I made is that for all the changes and challenges facing your industry, this country absolutely needs a healthy, vibrant media. 'Probably needs it more than ever now.

Today's technology -- today's technology has made it possible for us to get our news and information from a growing range of sources.  We can pick and choose not only our preferred type of media, but also our preferred perspective.  And while that exposes us to an unprecedented array of opinions, analysis, and points of view, it also makes it that much more important that we're all operating on a common baseline of facts. It makes it that much more important that journalists out there seek only the truth.

And I don't have to tell you that.  Some of you are seasoned veterans who have been on the political beat for decades; others here tonight began their careers as bloggers not long ago.  But I think it's fair to say that every single reporter in this room believes deeply in the enterprise of journalism.  Every one of you, even the most cynical among you, understands and cherishes the function of a free press and the preservation of our system of government and of our way of life.

And I want you to know that for all the jokes and the occasional gripes, I cherish that work, as well.  In fact, tonight I wanted to present all of you with a bipartisan congressional resolution that honors all those wonderful contributions that journalists have made to our country and the world -- but, unfortunately, I couldn't break the filibuster.

Thank you very much, everybody.  God bless you and God bless the United States of America.

All right everybody, please have a seat.

My fellow Americans, Mahalo! It is wonderful to be here at the White House Correspondents’ Dinner. What a week. As some of you heard, the state of Hawaii released my official long-form birth certificate.

  click to enlarge

Hopefully this puts all doubts to rest. But just in case there are any lingering questions, tonight I’m prepared to go a step further. Tonight, for the first time, I am releasing my official birth video.

Now, I warn you -- no one has seen this footage in 50 years, not even me. But let’s take a look.

 

Oh, well. Back to square one. I want to make clear to the Fox News table: That was a joke. That was not my real birth video. That was a children’s cartoon. Call Disney if you don't believe me. They have the original long-form version.

Anyway, it’s good to be back with so many esteemed guests. Celebrities. Senators. Journalists. Essential government employees. Non-essential government employees. You know who you are.

I am very much looking forward to hearing Seth Meyers tonight. He’s a young, fresh face who can do no wrong in the eyes of his fans. Seth, enjoy it while it lasts.

Yes, I think it is fair to say that when it comes to my presidency, the honeymoon is over. For example, some people now suggest that I’m too professorial. And I’d like to address that head-on, by assigning all of you some reading that will help you draw your own conclusions. Others say that I'm arrogant. But I've found a really great self-help tool for this: my poll numbers.

I’ve even let down my key core constituency: movie stars. Just the other day, Matt Damon -- I love Matt Damon, love the guy -- Matt Damon said he was disappointed in my performance. Well, Matt, I just saw “The Adjustment Bureau,” so -- right back atcha, buddy.

Of course, there’s someone who I can always count on for support: my wonderful wife Michelle. We made a terrific team at the Easter Egg Roll this week. I’d give out bags of candy to the kids, and she’d snatch them right back out of their little hands. Snatched them.

And where is the National Public Radio table? You guys are still here? That's good. I couldn’t remember where we landed on that. Now, I know you were a little tense when the GOP tried to cut your funding, but personally I was looking forward to new programming like “No Things Considered” -- or “Wait, Wait…Don't Fund Me.”

Of course, the deficit is a serious issue. That's why Paul Ryan couldn’t be here tonight. His budget has no room for laughter.

Michele Bachmann is here, though, I understand, and she is thinking about running for President, which is weird because I hear she was born in Canada. Yes, Michele, this is how it starts. Just letting you know.

Tim Pawlenty? He seems all American. But have you heard his real middle name?  Tim “Hosni” Pawlenty? What a shame.

My buddy, our outstanding ambassador, Jon Huntsman, is with us. Now, there’s something you might not know about Jon. He didn’t learn to speak Chinese to go there. Oh, no. He learned English to come here.

And then there’s a vicious rumor floating around that I think could really hurt Mitt Romney. I heard he passed universal health care when he was governor of Massachusetts. Someone should get to the bottom of that.  

And I know just the guy to do it -- Donald Trump is here tonight! Now, I know that he’s taken some flak lately, but no one is happier, no one is prouder to put this birth certificate matter to rest than the Donald.  And that’s because he can finally get back to focusing on the issues that matter –- like, did we fake the moon landing?  What really happened in Roswell? And where are Biggie and Tupac?

But all kidding aside, obviously, we all know about your credentials and breadth of experience. For example -- no, seriously, just recently, in an episode of Celebrity Apprentice -- at the steakhouse, the men’s cooking team cooking did not impress the judges from Omaha Steaks. And there was a lot of blame to go around. But you, Mr. Trump, recognized that the real problem was a lack of leadership. And so ultimately, you didn’t blame Lil’ Jon or Meatloaf. You fired Gary Busey. And these are the kind of decisions that would keep me up at night. Well handled, sir. Well handled. 

Say what you will about Mr. Trump, he certainly would bring some change to the White House. Let’s see what we’ve got up there.



So, yes, this has been quite a year in politics, but also in the movies. Many people, for instance, were inspired by the King’s Speech. It’s a wonderful film. Well, some of you may not know this, but there's now a sequel in the works that touches close to home. And because this is a Hollywood crowd, tonight I can offer a sneak peek. So can we show the trailer, please?



Coming to a theater near you.

Let me close on a serious note. We are having a good time, but as has been true for the last several years, we have incredible young men and women who are serving in uniform overseas in the most extraordinary of circumstances. And we are reminded of their courage and their valor.

We also need to remember our neighbors in Alabama and across the South that have been devastated by terrible storms from last week. Michelle and I were down there yesterday, and we’ve spent a lot of time with some of the folks who have been affected. The devastation is unimaginable and is heartbreaking and it’s going to be a long road back. And so we need to keep those Americans in our thoughts and in our prayers. But we also need to stand with them in the hard months and perhaps years to come.

I intend to make sure that the federal government does that. And I’ve got faith that the journalists in this room will do their part for the people who have been affected by this disaster -- by reporting on their progress, and letting the rest of America know when they will need more help. Those are stories that need telling. And that’s what all of you do best, whether it’s rushing to the site of a devastating storm in Alabama, or braving danger to cover a revolution in the Middle East.

You know, in the last months, we’ve seen journalists threatened, arrested, beaten, attacked, and in some cases even killed simply for doing their best to bring us the story, to give people a voice, and to hold leaders accountable. And through it all, we’ve seen daring men and women risk their lives for the simple idea that no one should be silenced, and everyone deserves to know the truth.

That’s what you do. At your best that's what journalism is. That’s the principle that you uphold. It is always important, but it’s especially important in times of challenge, like the moment that America and the world is facing now.

So I thank you for your service and the contributions that you make. And I want to close by recognizing not only your service, but also to remember those that have been lost as a consequence of the extraordinary reporting that they’ve done over recent weeks. They help, too, to defend our freedoms and allow democracy to flourish.

God bless you, and may God bless the United States of America.

Thank you. Thank you, everybody.  How do you like my new entrance music?  Rush Limbaugh warned you about this -- second term, baby.  We’re changing things around here a little bit.

Actually, my advisors were a little worried about the new rap entrance music.  They are a little more traditional. They suggested that I should start with some jokes at my own expense, just take myself down a peg. I was like, guys, after four and a half years, how many pegs are there left?

I want to thank the White House Correspondents. Ed, you’re doing an outstanding job. We are grateful for -- the great work you’ve done. To all the dignitaries who are here, everybody on the dais -- I especially want to say thank you to [General] Ray Odierno, who does outstanding service on behalf of our country, and all our men and women in uniform every single day.

And of course, our extraordinary First Lady, Michelle Obama. Everybody loves Michelle.  She’s on the cover of Vogue, high poll numbers. But don’t worry -- I recently got my own magazine cover.

Now, look, I get it. These days, I look in the mirror and I have to admit, I’m not the strapping young Muslim socialist that I used to be.  Time passes. You get a little gray.

And yet, even after all this time, I still make rookie mistakes. Like, I’m out in California, we’re at a fundraiser; we’re having a nice time. I happen to mention that Kamala Harris is the best-looking attorney general in the country.  As you might imagine, I got trouble when I got back home.  Who knew Eric Holder was so sensitive?

And then there’s the Easter Egg Roll, which is supposed to be just a nice, fun event with the kids. I go out on the basketball court, took 22 shots -- made two of them. That’s right: two hits, 20 misses. The executives at NBC asked, “What’s your secret?”

So, yes, maybe I have lost a step. But some things are beyond my control. For example, this whole controversy about Jaz-Z going to Cuba -- it’s unbelievable. I’ve got 99 problems and now Jay-Z is one.  That’s another rap reference, Bill.  I’ll let you know.

Of course, everybody has got plenty of advice. Maureen Dowd said I could solve all my problems if I were just more like Michael Douglas in “The American President.” And I know Michael is here tonight. Michael, what’s your secret, man?  Could it be that you were an actor in an Aaron Sorkin liberal fantasy?  Might that have something to do with it?  I don’t know. Check in with me. Maybe it’s something else.



Anyway, I recognize that this job can take a toll on you. I understand -- second term, you need a burst of new energy, try some new things. And my team and I talked about it. We were willing to try anything. So we borrowed one of Michelle’s tricks.  I thought this looked pretty good, but no bounce.

I want to give a shout-out to our headliner, Conan O’Brien.  I was just talking to Ed, and I understand that when the Correspondents’ Association was considering Conan for this gig, they were faced with that age-old dilemma: Do you offer it to him now, or wait for five years and then give it to Jimmy Fallon?  That was a little harsh. I love Conan.

And of course, the White House press corps is here. I know CNN has taken some knocks lately, but the fact is I admire their commitment to cover all sides of a story, just in case one of them happens to be accurate.

Some of my former advisors have switched over to the dark side. For example, David Axelrod now works for MSNBC, which is a nice change of pace since MSNBC used to work for David Axelrod.



The History Channel is not here. I guess they were embarrassed about the whole Obama-is-a-devil thing.  Of course, that never kept Fox News from showing up. They actually thought the comparison was not fair -- to Satan.

But the problem is, is that the media landscape is changing so rapidly. You can’t keep up with it. I mean, I remember when BuzzFeed was just something I did in college around 2:00 a.m.  It’s true.

Recently, though, I found a new favorite source for political news -- these guys are great. I think everybody here should check it out, they tell it like it is. It’s called WhiteHouse.gov.  I cannot get enough of it.

The fact is I really do respect the press. I recognize that the press and I have different jobs to do. My job is to be President; your job is to keep me humble. Frankly, I think I’m doing my job better.

But part of the problem is everybody is so cynical. I mean, we’re constantly feeding cynicism, suspicion, conspiracies. You remember a few months ago, my Administration put out a photograph of me going skeet shooting at Camp David?



You remember that? And quite a number of people insisted that this had been photoshopped. But tonight I have something to confess: You were right. Guys, can we show them the actual photo?



We were just trying to tone it down a little bit.  That was an awesome day.

There are other new players in the media landscape as well, like super PACs. Did you know that Sheldon Adelson spent 100 million dollars of his own money last year on negative ads? You’ve got to really dislike me -- to spend that kind of money. I mean, that’s Oprah money.  You could buy an island and call it “Nobama” for that kind of money.  Sheldon would have been better off offering me 100 million dollar to drop out of the race.  I probably wouldn’t have taken it, but I'd have thought about it.  Michelle would have taken it.  You think I’m joking?

I know Republicans are still sorting out what happened in 2012, but one thing they all agree on is they need to do a better job reaching out to minorities. And look, call me self-centered, but I can think of one minority they could start with.  Hello? Think of me as a trial run, you know?  See how it goes.

If they won’t come to me, I will come to them. Recently, I had dinner -- it’s been well publicized -- I had dinner with a number of the Republican senators. And I’ll admit it wasn’t easy. I proposed a toast -- it died in committee.

Of course, even after I've done all this, some folks still don’t think I spend enough time with Congress. "Why don’t you get a drink with Mitch McConnell?" they ask. Really?  Why don’t you get a drink with Mitch McConnell?  I'm sorry. I get frustrated sometimes.

I am not giving up. In fact, I'm taking my charm offensive on the road -- a Texas barbeque with Ted Cruz, a Kentucky bluegrass concert with Rand Paul, and a book-burning with Michele Bachmann.

My charm offensive has helped me learn some interesting things about what's going on in Congress -- it turns out, absolutely nothing.  But the point of my charm offensive is simple: We need to make progress on some important issues. Take the sequester. Republicans fell in love with this thing, and now they can't stop talking about how much they hate it. It's like we're trapped in a Taylor Swift album.

One senator who has reached across the aisle recently is Marco Rubio, but I don’t know about 2016. I mean, the guy has not even finished a single term in the Senate and he thinks he's ready to be President.  Kids these days.

I, on the other hand, have run my last campaign. On Thursday, as Ed mentioned, I went to the opening of the Bush Presidential Library in Dallas. It was a wonderful event, and that inspired me to get started on my own legacy, which will actually begin by building another edifice right next to the Bush Library -- can we show that, please?



I'm also hard at work on plans for the Obama Library. And some have suggested that we put it in my birthplace, but I'd rather keep it in the United States.  Did anybody not see that joke coming?  Show of hands. Only Gallup? Maybe Dick Morris?

Now, speaking of presidents and their legacies, I want to acknowledge a wonderful friend, Steven Spielberg, and Daniel Day-Lewis, who are here tonight.  We had a screening of their most recent film, Lincoln, which was an extraordinary film. I am a little nervous, though, about Steven's next project. I saw a behind-the-scenes look on HBO -- well, let's just check it out. Roll the tape.

[tape rolls]

It's a remarkable transformation. Do I really sound like that, though, honey?

Groucho Marx once said -- and, Senator Cruz, that’s Groucho Marx, not Karl. That’s the other guy.  Groucho Marx once told an audience, "Before I speak, I have something important to say."  And along those same lines, I want to close on a more serious note.

Obviously, there has been no shortage of news to cover over these past few weeks. And these have been some very hard days for too many of our citizens. Even as we gather here tonight, our thoughts are not far from the people of Boston and the people of West, Texas. There are families in the Midwest who are coping with some terrible floods. So we've had some difficult days.

But even when the days seemed darkest, we have seen humanity shine at its brightest. We've seen first responders and National Guardsmen who have dashed into danger, law enforcement officers who lived their oath to serve and to protect, and everyday Americans who are opening their homes and their hearts to perfect strangers.

And we also saw journalists at their best -- especially those who took the time to wade upstream through the torrent of digital rumors to chase down leads and verify facts and painstakingly put the pieces together to inform, and to educate, and to tell stories that demanded to be told.

If anyone wonders, for example, whether newspapers are a thing of the past, all you needed to do was to pick up or log on to papers like the Boston Globe.  When their communities and the wider world needed them most, they were there making sense of events that might at first blush seem beyond our comprehension. And that’s what great journalism is, and that’s what great journalists do. And that’s why, for example, Pete Williams' new nickname around the NBC newsroom is "Big Papi."

And in these past few weeks, as I've gotten a chance to meet many of the first responders and the police officers and volunteers who raced to help when hardship hits, I was reminded, as I'm always reminded when I meet our men and women in uniform, whether they're in war theater, or here back home, or at Walter Reed in Bethesda -- I'm reminded that all these folks, they don’t do it to be honored, they don’t do it to be celebrated. They do it because they love their families and they love their neighborhoods and they love their country.

And so, these men and women should inspire all of us in this room to live up to those same standards; to be worthy of their trust; to do our jobs with the same fidelity, and the same integrity, and the same sense of purpose, and the same love of country. Because if we're only focused on profits or ratings or polls, then we're contributing to the cynicism that so many people feel right now.

And so, those of us in this room tonight, we are incredibly lucky. And the fact is, we can do better -- all of us. Those of us in public office, those of us in the press, those who produce entertainment for our kids, those with power, those with influence -- all of us, including myself, we can strive to value those things that I suspect led most of us to do the work that we do in the first place -- because we believed in something that was true, and we believed in service, and the idea that we can have a lasting, positive impact on the lives of the people around us.

And that’s our obligation. That’s a task we should gladly embrace on behalf of all of those folks who are counting on us; on behalf of this country that’s given us so much.

So thank you all, to the White House Correspondents for the great work you do.

God bless you all.

May God bless the United States of America.

Thank you very much. Thank you. Thank you so much, everybody. Please have a seat, have a seat.  Before I get started, can we get the new presidential setup out here? 



It's worked before.



That's more like it.

It is great to be back.  What a year, huh?  I usually start these dinners with a few self-deprecating jokes.  After my stellar 2013, what could I possibly talk about?

I admit it -- last year was rough.  Sheesh.  At one point things got so bad, the 47 percent called Mitt Romney to apologize.

Of course, we rolled out healthcare.gov.  That could have gone better.  In 2008 my slogan was, "Yes We Can."  In 2013 my slogan was, "Control-Alt-Delete."  On the plus side, they did turn the launch of healthcare.gov into one of the year's biggest movies.

But rather than dwell on the past, I would like to pivot to this dinner.  Let's welcome our headliner this evening, Joel McHale. On "Community," Joel plays a preening, self-obsessed narcissist.  So this dinner must be a real change of pace for you.

I want to thank the White House Correspondents Association for hosting us here tonight.  I am happy to be here, even though I am a little jet-lagged from my trip to Malaysia.  The lengths we have to go to get CNN coverage these days. I think they're still searching for their table.

MSNBC is here.  They're a little overwhelmed.  They've never seen an audience this big before.

But, look, everybody is trying to keep up with this incredibly fast-changing media landscape.  For example, I got a lot of grief on cable news for promoting Obamacare to young people on Between Two Ferns.  But that's what young people like to watch.  And to be fair, I am not the first person on television between two potted plants.

Sometimes I do feel disrespected by you reporters.  But that's okay.  Seattle Seahawk cornerback Richard Sherman is here tonight.  And he gave me some great tips on how to handle it.  Jake Tapper, don't you ever talk about me like that!1 I'm the best President in the game!

What do you think, Richard?  Was that good?  A little more feeling next time?

While we're talking sports, just last month, a wonderful story -- an American won the Boston Marathon for first time in 30 years.  Which was inspiring and only fair, since a Kenyan has been president for the last six. Had to even things out.

We have some other athletes here tonight, including Olympic snowboarding gold medalist Jamie Anderson is here.  We're proud of her.  Incredibly talented young lady.  Michelle and I watched the Olympics -- we cannot believe what these folks do -- death-defying feats -- haven't seen somebody pull a "180" that fast since Rand Paul disinvited that Nevada rancher from this dinner.  As a general rule, things don't like end well if the sentence starts, Let me tell you something "I know about the negro."2  You don't really need to hear the rest of it.  Just a tip for you -- don't start your sentence that way.

Speaking of Rand Paul -- Colorado legalized marijuana this year, an interesting social experiment.  I do hope it doesn't lead to a whole lot of paranoid people who think that the federal government is out to get them and listening to their phone calls.  That would be a problem.

And speaking of conservative heroes, the Koch brothers bought a table here tonight.  But as usual, they used a shadowy right-wing organization as a front.  Hello, Fox News.

I'm just kidding.  Let's face it, Fox, you'll miss me when I'm gone. It will be harder to convince the American people that Hillary was born in Kenya.

A lot of us really are concerned about the way big money is influencing our politics.  I remember when a Super PAC was just me buying Marlboro 100s instead of regulars.

Of course, now that it's 2014, Washington is obsessed on the midterms.  Folks are saying that with my sagging poll numbers, my fellow Democrats don't really want me campaigning with them.  And I don't think that's true -- although I did notice the other day that Sasha needed a speaker at career day, and she invited Bill Clinton. I was a little hurt by that.

Both sides are doing whatever it takes to win the ruthless game.  Republicans -- this is a true story -- Republicans actually brought in a group of consultants to teach their candidates how to speak to women.  This is true.  And I don't know if it will work with women, but I understand that America's teenage boys are signing up to run for the Senate in droves.

Anyway, while you guys focus on the horserace, I'm going to do what I do -- I'm going to be focused on everyday Americans.  Just yesterday, I read a heartbreaking letter -- you know I get letters from folks from around the country; every day I get 10 that I read -- this one got to me.  A Virginia man who's been stuck in the same part-time job for years; no respect from his boss; no chance to get ahead.  I really wish Eric Cantor would stop writing me. You can just pick up the phone, Eric.

And I'm feeling sorry -- believe it or not -- for the Speaker of the House, as well.  These days, the House Republicans actually give John Boehner a harder time than they give me, which means orange really is the new black.

But I have not given up the idea of working with Congress. In fact, two weeks ago, Senator Ted Cruz and I, we got a bill done together.  And I have to say, the signing ceremony was something special.  We've got a picture of it I think.

Look, I know, Washington seems more dysfunctional than ever.  Gridlock has gotten so bad in this town you have to wonder:  What did we do to piss off Chris Christie so bad?

One issue, for example, we haven't been able to agree on is unemployment insurance.  Republicans continue to refuse to extend it.  And you know what, I am beginning to think they've got a point.  If you want to get paid while not working, you should have to run for Congress just like everybody else.

Of course, there is one thing that keeps Republicans busy.  They have tried more than 50 times to repeal Obamacare.  Despite that, 8 million people signed up for health care in the first open enrollment. Which does lead one to ask, How well does Obamacare have to work before you don't want to repeal it?  What if everybody's cholesterol drops to 120?  What if your yearly checkup came with tickets to a Clippers game?  Not the old, Donald Sterling Clippers -- the new Oprah Clippers.  Would that be good enough? What if they gave Mitch McConnell a pulse?  What is it going to take?

Anyway, this year, I've promised to use more executive actions to get things done without Congress.  My critics call this the "imperial presidency."  The truth is, I just show up every day in my office and do my job.  I've got a picture of this, I think.  You would think they'd appreciate a more assertive approach, considering that the new conservative darling is none other than Vladimir Putin.  Last year, Pat Buchanan said Putin is "headed straight for the Nobel Peace Prize."3  He said this.  Now I know it sounds crazy but to be fair, they give those to just about anybody these days.  So it could happen.

But it's not just Pat -- Rudy Giuliani said Putin is "what you call a leader."  Mike Huckabee and Sean Hannity keep talking about his bare chest, which is kind of weird.  Look it up -- they talk about it a lot.

It is strange to think that I have just two and a half years left in this office.  Everywhere I look, there are reminders that I only hold this job temporarily.

But it's a long time between now and 2016, and anything can happen.  You may have heard the other day, Hillary had to dodge a flying shoe at a press conference.  I love that picture.

Regardless of what happens, I've run my last campaign and I'm beginning to think about my legacy.  Some of you know -- Mayor Rahm Emanuel recently announced he is naming a high school in Chicago after me, which is extremely humbling.  I was even more flattered to hear Rick Perry, who is here tonight, is doing the same thing in Texas.  Take a look. Thank you, Rick.  It means a lot to me.

And I intend to enjoy all the free time that I will have.  George W. Bush took up painting after he left office, which inspired me to take up my own artistic side.  I'm sure we've got a shot of this. Maybe not.  The joke doesn't work without the slide.  Oh well.  Assume that it was funny. Does this happen to you, Joel?  It does?  Okay.

On a more serious note, tonight reminds us that we really are lucky to live in a country where reporters get to give a head of state a hard time on a daily basis -- and then, once a year, give him or her the chance, at least, to try to return the favor.

But we also know that not every journalist, or photographer, or crewmember is so fortunate, because even as we celebrate the free press tonight, our thoughts are with those in places around the globe like Ukraine, and Afghanistan, and Syria, and Egypt, who risk everything -- in some cases, even give their lives -- to report the news. 

And what tonight also reminds us is that the fight for full and fair access goes beyond the chance to ask a question.  As Steve mentioned, decades ago, an African American who wanted to cover his or her President might be barred from journalism school, burdened by Jim Crow, and, once in Washington, banned from press conferences.  But after years of effort, black editors and publishers began meeting with FDR's press secretary, Steve Early.  And then they met with the President himself, who declared that a black reporter would get a credential.  And even when Harry McAlpin made history as the first African American to attend a presidential news conference, he wasn't always welcomed by the other reporters.  But he was welcomed by the President, who told him, I'm glad to see you, McAlpin, and I'm very happy to have you here.

Now, that sentiment might have worn off once Harry asked him a question or two -- and Harry's battles continued.  But he made history.  And we're s proud of Sherman and his family for being here tonight, and the White House Correspondents Association for creating a scholarship in Harry's name.

For over 100 years, even as the White House Correspondents Association has told the story of America's progress, you've lived it, too -- gradually allowing equal access to women, and minorities, and gays, and Americans with disabilities.  And, yes, radio, and television, and Internet reporters, as well.  And through it all, you've helped make sure that even as societies change, our fundamental commitment to the interaction between those who govern and those who ask questions doesn't change.  And as Jay will attest, it's a legacy you carry on enthusiastically  every single day.

And because this is the 100th anniversary of the Correspondents' Association, I actually recorded an additional brief video thanking all of you for your hard work.  Can we run the video?

Good evening, everybody.  Welcome to the White House Correspondents Dinner -- the night when Washington celebrates itself.  Somebody's got to do it.

And welcome to the fourth quarter of my presidency.  It's true -- that was Michelle cheering.  The fact is, I feel more loose and relaxed than ever.  Those Joe Biden shoulder massages, they're like magic.  You should try one.  Oh, you have.

I am determined to make the most of every moment I have left.  After the midterm elections, my advisors asked me, "Mr. President, do you have a bucket list?"  And I said, "Well, I have something that rhymes with bucket list.'"

Take executive action on immigration?  Bucket. New climate regulations?  Bucket.  It's the right thing to do.

And my new attitude is paying off.  Look at my Cuba policy.  The Castro brothers are here tonight. Welcome to America, amigos!  Que pasa?  What?  It's the Castros from Texas? Oh.  Hi Joaquin.  Hi Julian.

Anyway, being President is never easy. I still have to fix a broken immigration system, issue veto threats, negotiate with Iran -- all while finding time to pray five times a day. Which is strenuous.

And it is no wonder that people keep pointing out how the presidency has aged me.  I look so old, John Boehner has already invited Netanyahu to speak at my funeral. 

Meanwhile, Michelle hasn't aged a day. I ask her what her secret is, she just says "fresh fruits and vegetables."  It's aggravating.

The fact is, though, at this point, my legacy is finally beginning to take shape.  The economy is getting better.  Nine in ten Americans now have health coverage. Today, thanks to Obamacare, you no longer have to worry about losing your insurance if you lose your job.  You're welcome, Senate Democrats.

Now, look, it is true I have not managed to make everybody happy.  Six years into my presidency, some people still say I'm arrogant and aloof, condescending.  Some people are so dumb. No wonder I don't meet with them.

And that's not all people say about me.  A few weeks ago, Dick Cheney says he thinks I'm the worst President of his lifetime.  Which is interesting, because I think Dick Cheney is the worst President of my lifetime. It's quite a coincidence.

I mean, everybody has got something to say these days.  Mike Huckabee recently said people shouldn't join our military until a true conservative is elected President.  Think about that.  It was so outrageous, 47 Ayatollahs wrote us a letter trying to explain to Huckabee how our system works.

It gets worse.  Just this week, Michele Bachmann actually predicted that I would bring about the biblical end of days. Now that's a legacy! That's big.  I mean, Lincoln, Washington -- they didn't do that.

But I just have to put this stuff aside, I've got to stay focused on my job, because for many Americans, this is still a time of deep uncertainty.  For example, I have one friend -- just a few weeks ago, she was making millions of dollars a year.  And she's now living out of a van in Iowa.

Meanwhile, back here in our nation's capital, we're always dealing with new challenges.  I'm happy to report that the Secret Service, thanks to some excellent reporting by White House correspondents, they're really focusing on some of the issues that have come up.  And they finally figured out a full-proof way to keep people off my lawn.



It works.  And it's not just fence-jumpers.  As some of you know, a few months ago, a drone crash-landed out back.  That was pretty serious, but don't worry, we've installed a new, state-of-the-art security system.



You know what, let me set the record straight.  I tease Joe sometimes, but he has been at my side for seven years now.  I love that man. He's not just a great Vice President, he is a great friend.  We've gotten so close, in some places in Indiana, they won't serve us pizza anymore.

I want to thank our host for the evening, a Chicago girl, the incredibly talented Cecily Strong. On "Saturday Night Live," Cecily impersonates CNN anchor Brooke Baldwin.  Which is surprising, because usually the only people impersonating journalists on CNN are journalists on CNN.

ABC is here with some of the stars from their big new comedy, "Black-ish. "It's a great show, but I have to give ABC fair warning -- being "Black-ish" only makes you popular for so long.  Trust me. There's a shelf life to that thing.

As always, the reporters here had a lot to cover over the last year.  Here on the East Coast, one big story was the brutal winter.  The polar vortex caused so many record lows, they renamed it "MSNBC."

But of course, let's face it, there is one issue on every reporter's mind and that is 2016.  Already, we've seen some missteps.  It turns out Jeb Bush identified himself as "Hispanic" back in 2009.  Which you know what, look, I understand.  It's an innocent mistake.  Reminds me of when I identified myself as "American" back in 1961.

Ted Cruz said that denying the existence of climate change made him like Galileo. Now that's not really an apt comparison.  Galileo believed the Earth revolves around the sun.  Ted Cruz believes the Earth revolves around Ted Cruz. And just as an aside, I want to point out, when a guy who has his face on a "Hope" poster calls you self-centered, you know you've got a problem. The narcissism index is creeping up a little too high.

Meanwhile, Rick Santorum announced that he would not attend the same-sex wedding of a friend or a loved one.  To which gays and lesbians across the country responded, that's not going to be a problem. Don't sweat that one.

And Donald Trump is here.  Still. 

Anyway. It's amazing how time flies.  Soon, the first presidential contest will take place.  And I for one cannot wait to see who the Koch brothers pick.

It's exciting.  Marco Rubio, Rand Paul, Ted Cruz, Jeb Bush, Scott Walker.  Who will finally get that red rose? The winner gets a billion-dollar war chest.  The runner up gets to be the bachelor on the next season of "The Bachelor. "I mean, seriously, a billion dollars.  From just two guys.  Is it just me, or does that feel a little excessive? I mean, it's almost insulting to the candidates.  The Koch brothers think they need to spend a billion dollars to get folks to like one of these people. It's got to hurt their feelings a little bit.

And, look, I know I've raised a lot of money too.  But in all fairness, my middle name is "Hussein. "What's their excuse? 

The trail hasn't been easy for my fellow Democrats either.  As we all know, Hillary's private emails got her in trouble. Frankly, I thought it was going to be her private Instagram account that was going to cause her bigger problems. 



Hillary kicked things off by going completely unrecognized at a Chipotle.  Not to be outdone, Martin O'Malley kicked things off by going completely unrecognized at a Martin O'Malley campaign event. 

And Bernie Sanders might run.  I like Bernie.  Bernie is an interesting guy.  Apparently some folks really want to see a pot-smoking socialist in the White House. We could get a third Obama term after all. It could happen.

Anyway, as always, I want to close on a more serious note.  I often joke about tensions between me and the press, but honestly, what they say doesn't bother me.  I understand we've got an adversarial system.  I'm a mellow sort of guy. 

And that's why I invited Luther, my anger translator, to join me here tonight.   

Now that I got that off my chest.  Investigative journalism; explanatory journalism; journalism that exposes corruption and injustice and gives a voice to the different, the marginalized, the voiceless -- that's power.  It's a privilege.  It's as important to America's trajectory -- to our values, our ideals -- than anything that we could do in elected office.

We remember journalists we lost over the past year -- journalists like Steven Sotloff and James Foley, murdered for nothing more than trying to shine a light into some of the world's darkest corners. We remember the journalists unjustly imprisoned around the world, including our own Jason Rezaian. For nine months, Jason has been imprisoned in Tehran for nothing more than writing about the hopes and the fears of the Iranian people, carrying their stories to the readers of the Washington Post in an effort to bridge our common humanity.  As was already mentioned, Jason's brother, Ali, is here tonight and I have told him personally we will not rest until we bring him home to his family, safe and sound. 

These journalists and so many others view their work as more than just a profession, but as a public good; an indispensable pillar of our society.  So I want to give a toast to them.  I raise a glass to them and all of you, with the words of the American foreign correspondent Dorothy Thompson:  "It is not the fact of liberty, but the way in which liberty is exercised, that ultimately determines whether liberty itself survives."

Thank you for your devotion to exercising our liberty, and to telling our American story.

God bless you.  God bless the United States of America. 
She looks so happy to be here.  That's called practice -- it's like learning to do three-minute planks.  She makes it look easy now.

Next year at this time, someone else will be standing here in this very spot, and it's anyone's guess who she will be.  But standing here, I can't help but be reflective, a little sentimental. Eight years ago, I said it was time to change the tone of our politics. In hindsight, I clearly should have been more specific.

Eight years ago, I was a young man, full of idealism and vigor, and look at me now.  I am gray and grizzled, just counting down the days 'til my death panel.  Hillary once questioned whether I'd be ready for a 3 a.m. phone call -- now I'm awake anyway because I've got to go to the bathroom. I'm up.

In fact, somebody recently said to me, "Mr. President, you are so yesterday. Justin Trudeau has completely replaced you: He's so handsome; he's so charming; he's the future."



And I said, "Justin, just give it a rest."  I resented that.

Meanwhile, Michelle has not aged a day.  The only way you can date her in photos is by looking at me.

Take a look.



Here we are in 2008.

 



Here we are a few years later.

 



And this one is from two weeks ago.

So time passes.  In just six short months, I will be officially a lame duck, which means Congress now will flat-out reject my authority.  And Republican leaders won't take my phone calls. And this is going to take some getting used to, it's really going to -- it's a curve ball. I don't know what to do with it.

Of course, in fact, for months now congressional Republicans have been saying there are things I cannot do in my final year. Unfortunately, this dinner was not one of them.  But on everything else, it's another story. And you know who you are, Republicans. In fact, I think we've got Republican Senators Tim Scott and Cory Gardner, they're in the house, which reminds me -- Security, bar the doors!  Judge Merrick Garland, come on out, we're going to do this right here, right now.  It's like "The Red Wedding."

But it's not just Congress. Even some foreign leaders, they've been looking ahead, anticipating my departure. Last week, Prince George showed up to our meeting in his bathrobe.



That was a slap in the face.  A clear breach in protocol.  Although while in England I did have lunch with Her Majesty, the Queen, took in a performance of Shakespeare, hit the links with David Cameron. (Just in case anybody is still debating whether I'm black enough, I think that settles the debate.)

I won't lie -- look, this is a tough transition. It's hard. Key staff are now starting to leave the White House.

Even reporters have left me:

Savannah Guthrie, she's left the White House Press Corps to host the Today show.

Norah O'Donnell left the briefing room to host CBS This Morning.

Jake Tapper left journalism to join CNN.



But the prospect of leaving the White House is a mixed bag. You might have heard that someone jumped the White House fence last week, but I have to give Secret Service credit -- they found Michelle, brought her back; she's safe back at home now.  It's only nine more months, baby. Settle down.

And yet, somehow, despite all this, despite the churn, in my final year, my approval ratings keep going up.  The last time I was this high, I was trying to decide on my major.

And here's the thing: I haven't really done anything differently. So it's odd. Even my aides can't explain the rising poll numbers -- what has changed, nobody can figure it out.



Puzzling....

Anyway, in this last year I do have more appreciation for those who have been with me on this amazing ride, like one of our finest public servants, Joe Biden. God bless him. Love that guy.  I love Joe Biden -- I really do. And I want to thank him for his friendship, for his counsel, for always giving it to me straight, for not shooting anybody in the face.  Thank you, Joe.

Also, I would be remiss -- let's give it up for our host, Larry Wilmore.  Also known as one of the two black guys [along with Trevor Noah] who is not Jon Stewart.  You're the South African guy, right?  I love Larry. And his parents are here, who are from Evanston, which is a great town.

I also would like to acknowledge some of the award-winning reporters that we have with us here tonight. Rachel McAdams. Mark Ruffalo. Liev Schreiber.  Thank you all for everything that you've done.  I'm just joking. As you know, Spotlight is a film, a movie about investigative journalists with the resources and the autonomy to chase down the truth and hold the powerful accountable. Best fantasy film since Star Wars.  Look -- that was maybe a cheap shot.

I understand the news business is tough these days, it keeps changing all the time. Every year at this dinner, somebody makes a joke about BuzzFeed, for example, changing the media landscape. And every year, the Washington Post laughs a little bit less hard.  Kind of a silence there.  Especially at the Washington Post table.

GOP Chairman Reince Priebus is here as well.  Glad to see you that you feel that you've earned a night off.  Congratulations on all your success. The Republican Party, the nomination process -– it's all going great. Keep it up.

Kendall Jenner is also here. And we had a chance to meet her backstage -- she seems like a very nice young woman. I'm not exactly sure what she does, but I am told that my Twitter mentions are about to go through the roof.

Helen Mirren is here tonight.  I don't even have a joke here. I just think Helen Mirren is awesome.  She's awesome.

Sitting at the same table, I see Mike Bloomberg.  Mike, a combative, controversial New York billionaire is leading the GOP primary and it is not you.  That's has to sting a little bit.  Although it's not an entirely fair comparison between you and The Donald. After all, Mike was a big-city mayor. He knows policy in depth. And he's actually worth the amount of money that he says he is.

What an election season. For example, we've got the bright new face of the Democratic Party here tonight –- Mr. Bernie Sanders!  There he is -- Bernie!  Bernie, you look like a million bucks.  Or to put it in terms you'll understand, you look like 37,000 donations of 27 dollars each.

A lot of folks have been surprised by the Bernie phenomenon, especially his appeal to young people. But not me, I get it. Just recently, a young person came up to me and said she was sick of politicians standing in the way of her dreams. As if we were actually going to let Malia go to Burning Man this year.  That was not going to happen.  Bernie might have let her go.  Not us.

I am hurt, though, Bernie, that you've distancing yourself a little from me.  I mean, that's just not something that you do to your comrade.



Bernie's slogan has helped his campaign catch fire among young people. "Feel the Bern."  Feel the Bern -- it's a good slogan.

Hillary's slogan has not had the same effect. Let's see this.



Look, I've said how much I admire Hillary's toughness, her smarts, her policy chops, her experience. You've got to admit it, though, Hillary trying to appeal to young voters is a little bit like your relative just signed up for Facebook:  "Dear America, did you get my poke?"  "Is it appearing on your wall?"  "I'm not sure I am using this right. Love, Aunt Hillary."  It's not entirely persuasive.

Meanwhile, on the Republican side, things are a little more -- How should we say this? -- a little more "loose." Just look at the confusion over the invitations to tonight's dinner. Guests were asked to check whether they wanted steak or fish, but instead, a whole bunch of you wrote in: Paul Ryan.  That's not an option, people. Steak or fish.  You may not like steak or fish -- but that's your choice.

Meanwhile, some candidates aren't polling high enough to qualify for their own joke tonight.



The rules were well-established ahead of time.

And then there's Ted Cruz. Ted had a tough week. He went to Indiana –- Hoosier country –- stood on a basketball court, and called the hoop a "basketball ring."  What else is in his lexicon? Baseball sticks? Football hats?  But sure, I'm the foreign one.

Well, let me conclude tonight on a more serious note. I want to thank the Washington press corps, I want to thank Carol for all that you do. The free press is central to our democracy, and -- nah, I'm just kidding! You know I've got to talk about Trump! Come on!  We weren't just going to stop there. Come on.

Although I am a little hurt that he's not here tonight. We had so much fun the last time.  And it is surprising. You've got a room full of reporters, celebrities, cameras, and he says no?  Is this dinner too tacky for The Donald?  What could he possibly be doing instead? Is he at home, eating a Trump Steak -- tweeting out insults to Angela Merkel?  What's he doing?

The Republican establishment is incredulous that he is their most likely nominee -- incredulous, shocking. They say Donald lacks the foreign policy experience to be President. But, in fairness, he has spent years meeting with leaders from around the world: Miss Sweden, Miss Argentina, Miss Azerbaijan.

And there's one area where Donald's experience could be invaluable -– and that's closing Guantanamo. Because Trump knows a thing or two about running waterfront properties into the ground.

All right, that's probably enough. I mean, I've got more material -- no, no, I don't want to spend too much time on The Donald. Following your lead, I want to show some restraint.  Because I think we can all agree that from the start, he's gotten the appropriate amount of coverage, befitting the seriousness of his candidacy.

I hope you all are proud of yourselves.  The guy wanted to give his hotel business a boost, and now we're praying that Cleveland makes it through July.

Mm-mm-mm.  Hmm.

As for me and Michelle, we've decided to stay in D.C. for a couple more years.  Thank you. This way, our youngest daughter can finish up high school, Michelle can stay closer to her plot of carrots.  She's already making plans to see them every day. Take a look.



But our decision has actually presented a bit of a dilemma because, traditionally, Presidents don't stick around after they're done. And it's something that I've been brooding about a little bit. Take a look.



I am still waiting for all of you to respond to my invitation to connect on LinkedIn.  But I know you have jobs to do, which is what really brings us here tonight.

I know that there are times that we've had differences, and that's inherent in our institutional roles -- it's true of every President and his press corps. But we've always shared the same goal -- to root our public discourse in the truth; to open the doors of this democracy; to do whatever we can to make our country and our world more free and more just. And I've always appreciated the role that you have all played as equal partners in reaching these goals.

And our free press is why we once again recognize the real journalists who uncovered a horrifying scandal and brought about some measure of justice for thousands of victims throughout the world. They are here with us tonight –- Sacha Pfeiffer, Mike Rezendes, Walter Robinson, Matt Carroll, and Ben Bradlee, Jr. Please give them a big round of applause.

Our free press is why, once again, we honor Jason Rezaian.  As Carol noted, last time this year, we spoke of Jason's courage as he endured the isolation of an Iranian prison. This year, we see that courage in the flesh and it's a living testament to the very idea of a free press, and a reminder of the rising level of danger, and political intimidation, and physical threats faced by reporters overseas. And I can make this commitment that as long as I hold this office, my Administration will continue to fight for the release of American journalists held against their will -- and we will not stop until they see the same freedom as Jason had.

At home and abroad, journalists like all of you engage in the dogged pursuit of informing citizens, and holding leaders accountable, and making our government of the people possible. And it's an enormous responsibility. And I realize it's an enormous challenge at a time when the economics of the business sometimes incentivize speed over depth; and when controversy and conflict are what most immediately attract readers and viewers.

The good news is there are so many of you that are pushing against those trends. And as a citizen of this great democracy, I am grateful for that. For this is also a time around the world when some of the fundamental ideals of liberal democracies are under attack, and when notions of objectivity, and of a free press, and of facts, and of evidence are trying to be undermined. Or, in some cases, ignored entirely.

And in such a climate, it's not enough just to give people a megaphone. And that's why your power and your responsibility to dig and to question and to counter distortions and untruths is more important than ever. Taking a stand on behalf of what is true does not require you shedding your objectivity. In fact, it is the essence of good journalism. It affirms the idea that the only way we can build consensus, the only way that we can move forward as a country, the only way we can help the world mend itself is by agreeing on a baseline of facts when it comes to the challenges that confront us all.

So this night is a testament to all of you who have devoted your lives to that idea, who push to shine a light on the truth every single day. So I want to close my final White House Correspondents' Dinner by just saying thank you.  I'm very proud of what you've done. It has been an honor and a privilege to work side by side with you to strengthen our democracy.

And with that, I just have two more words to say -–

Obama out.

